# AZ-700

```
1. Vnets
	a. Similar to on prem + scale availability isolation benefits
	b. Each Vnet has its own CIDR block
	c. Capabilities
		i. Communicate with internet
		ii. Communication between azure resources
			1) Vnets
			2) Vnet service endpoints
			3) Vnet peering
		iii. With on prem - Point to site VPN , Site to site VPN , azure ExpressRoute
		iv. Filtering network traffic - nsg, network virtual appliances - firewalls , gateways, proxies, NAT
		v. Routing network traffic - route table, border gateway protocol (BGP) routes
	d. Design considerations
		i. Multiple vnets per region per subs
		ii. Multiple subnets within vnet
		iii. Address - RFC 1918 by IEFT for private , non-routable address space
			1) 10.0.0.0 - 10.255.255.255 ; 10/8
			2) 172.16.0.0 - 172.31.255.255 ; 172.16/12
			3) 192.168.0.0 - 192.168.255.255 ; 192.168/16
		iv. Cant add
			1) 224.0.0.0/4 (Multicast)
			2) 255.255.255.255/32 (Broadcast)
			3) 127.0.0.0/8 (Loopback)
			4) 169.254.0.0/16 (Link-local)
			5) 168.63.129.16/32 (Internal DNS)
		v. Azure reserves firs four and last IP - total 5 within each subnet
			1) 192.168.1.0 : Network address
			2) 192.168.1.1 : Reserved by Azure for the default gateway
			3) 192.168.1.2, 192.168.1.3 : Reserved by Azure to map the Azure DNS IPs to the VNet space
			4) 192.168.1.255 : Network broadcast address.
		vi. Ensure non-overlapping address spaces
	e. Subnets
		i. Smallest /28 largest /2
		ii. IPv6 must be exactly /64 in size
		iii. Subnets can be used for traffic management - route traffic through a network virtual appliance
		iv. We can limit access to Azure resources to specific subnets with a virtual network service endpoint
	f. Naming convention
		i. pip-sharepoint-prod-westus-001 - PublicIp
		ii. A resource name must be unique within its scope
			1) Management group
			2) Subscription
			3) Resource group
			4) Resource
	g. Regions and subscriptions
	h. Azure availability zones
		i. Unique physical locations within a region
		ii. Each zone - independent datacentres
		iii. Physical separation of availability zones within a region
		iv. Categories
			1) Zonal services
			2) Zone-redundant services
			3) Non-regional services
2. Public ip
	a. Associate public ip with
		i. Virtual machine network interfaces
		ii. Virtual machine scale sets
		iii. Public Load Balancers
		iv. Virtual Network Gateways (VPN/ER)
		v. NAT gateways
		vi. Application Gateways
		vii. Azure Firewall
		viii. Bastion Host
		ix. Route Server
	b. Dynamic ip - stop / delete vm  - default
		i. Standard public ip are statically allocated
	c. Public IP address prefix
	d. Custom IP address prefix (BYOIP)
3. Name resolution for virtual network
	a. Public and private DNS
	b. Public DNS
		i. Azure DNS
			1) Host records : A/AAAA
			2) Alias records : CNAME
		ii. DNS zone hosts the DNS record for a domain
			1) Create a DNS zone
		iii. Zone unique in resource group , can be used in diff RG or subs
		iv. Root/parent domain registered at registrar and pointed to azure ns
		v. Chile domains are registered in AzureDNS directly
			1) Parent and child zone can be in same or diff RG
	c. Delegate DNS domains
		i. Name server for zone
		ii. DNS record sets and individual DNS records. A record set is a collection of records in a zone that have the same name and are the same type.
		iii. For A record - TTL (time to live) and ip add
	d. Private DNS services
		i. Azure DNS Private Zones
		ii. Azure-provided name resolution
		iii. Name resolution that uses your own DNS server
	e. Azure provided DNS
		i. 168.63.129.16 not accessible to external clients
4. Configure domain name servers settings in Azure
	a. Create private DNS zone -> link the Vnets for registration and resolution -> create VM
5. cross-virtual network connectivity with peering
	a. Region - vnet peering ; diff region - Gloabl vnet peering
	b. Network traffic between vnets is private
	c. Uses microsoft backbone infrastructure , no public internet
	d. Entry in route tables
	e. When you add a peering on one vnet, the secon vnet config is automatically added
	f. Gateway transit and connectivity
		i. A vnet can have only one gateway
	g. Service chaining to direct traffic to a gateway
		i. Add user defined routes - to a vm - as next hop IP add
		ii. Network virtual appliances or vpn gateway
		iii. Hub and spoke topology
6. Vnet traffic routing
	a. Azure automatically creates a route table for each subnet
	b. Cant create or delete system routes but override
	c. Routes for vnet peering is added
	d. Vnet peering , vnet gateway, network service endpoint ( service endpoints are enabled for individual subnet within a vnet) ( azure service ip changes periodically azure manages the route table entries)
	e. The VNet peering and VirtualNetworkServiceEndpoint next hop types are only added to route tables of subnets within virtual networks created through the Azure Resource Manager deployment model. The next hop types are not added to route tables that are associated to virtual network subnets created through the classic deployment model.
	f. Virtual network gateway - VPN ?
	g. Type for user defined routes
		i. Virtual appliance ip
		ii. Virtual network gateway
		iii. None
		iv. Vnet - within vnet
		v. Internet
	h. Create route table - create a custom route - associate the route table
	i. Secure a vnet by using force tunneling
		i. To audit logging it policy
		ii. Forced tunnelling - only through powershell not portal
	j. Configure forced tunneling
		i. Using vnet custom user-defined routes
			1) Create a routing table
			2) Add a user defined default route to vpn gateway
			3) Associate to subnets
		ii. Forced tunneling must be associate with vnet that that has route based vpn gateway
	k. Azure route server
		i. Azure Route Server simplifies dynamic routing between your network virtual appliance (NVA) and your virtual network. It allows you to exchange routing information directly through Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) routing protocol between any NVA that supports the BGP routing protocol and the Azure Software Defined Network (SDN) in the Azure Virtual Network (VNET) without the need to manually configure or maintain route tables.
	l. Troubleshooting
		i. Vn settings networking Ni support troubleshooting effective routes
7. Configure internet access with azure virtual NAT
	a. NAT is compatible with standard SKU public ip
	b. NAT - return active flow only allowed
	c. Subnet -> nat -> public ip or IP prefix
	d. Define nat confic for each subnet . Nat can support upto 16  public ip add
	e. Deploy NAT
	f. Udr not necessary
	g. NAT is comaptible with standard sku of
		i. Load balancer
		ii. Public ip address
		iii. Public ip prefix
	h. Limitation
		i. Basic resoure should be placed on subnet not configured with nat
		ii. Not IPv6
		iii. Not multiple vnet
		iv. Ip fragmentation isnt supported
	i. PNAT - port = 64000 concurrent traffic flows
8. Design and implement Azure VPN gateway
	a. Connect two or more trusted private network over untrusted (internet) network
	b. Connecting on-prem network to azure vnet - through VPN connection
	c. Azure VPN gateways
		i. Vnet gateway - vms deployes to a specific subnet called the gateway subnet
		ii. VMs hosts - routing tables and run specific gateway services
		iii. Managed by azure
	d. Plant a vpn gateway
		i. Three architectures
			1) P2S
			2) S2S over internet
			3) S2S over dedicated network like Azure ExpressRoute
	e. Factors
		i. Throughput - Mbps or Gbps
		ii. Backbone - Internet or private
		iii. Availability of a public (static) ip address
		iv. VPN device compatibility
		v. Multiple client connections or a site-to-site link
		vi. VPN gateway type
		vii. Azure VPN gateway SKU
	f. Gateway sky and generation
		i. Basic doesnt support IKEv2/openvpn , SSTP supported  (128 P2S)
		ii. The resizing of VpnGw SKU is allowed withing the same generation
		iii. Change delete and create for BASIC
	g. VPN gateway types
		i. P2S - Routebased VPN type
		ii. S2S - required a VPN device
		iii. Two tyoes
			1) PolicyBased
				a) Called as static routing gateways
				b) Encrypt -> direct -> through Ipsec tunnels based on the Ipsec policies
				c) Policy - access list in the VPN device configuration
				d) PolicyBased VPN with IKEv1 protocols can be used with Basic Gateway SKUs only
				e) Only 1 tunnel -> therefore S2S connections
			2) RouteBased
				a) Called as dynamic routing gateways
	h. VPN gateway config requirements
		i. One vnet one gateway
		ii. gateway subnet must be named GatewaySubnet
		iii. Min /29 - but recommend /27 or larger
	i. Create the local network gateway
		i. On prem - ip or FQDN
		ii. Name - endpoint - ip address /fqdn - address space that will be given to onprem
	j. Configure the on prem vpn device
	k. High availability options for VPN connections or vnet to vnet connections (contrast 1 and bgp optional)
		i. VPN Gateway redundancy (Active-standby)
		ii. Multiple on-premises VPN devices - BGP required - Equal-cost multi-path routing (ECMP).
		iii. Active-active Azure VPN gateway
		iv. Combination of both - dual redundancy
	l. Troubleshoot Azure VPN gateway
		i. Using diagnostic logs
			1) Gateway, tunnel, route, ike, p2s
9. P2S protocol
	a. OpenVPN -SSL/TLS based  can penetrate firewalls
	b. Secure Socket Tunnelling Protocol SSTP - proprietary TLS based - windows only
	c. IKEv3 VPN - based on Ipsec solution - mac
	d. Authentication
		i. Using native azure certificate auth
		ii. Microsoft Entra
			1) Native supported for Open VPN protocol and windows 1-
		iii. Authenticate using Active Directory Domain server
			1) Requires a RADIUS server - Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service - either onprem or on vnet
	e. Configure P2S
		i. Azure provides vpn client config file windows- installer package ; mac - mobileconfig file
10. Connect remote resources by using Azure Virtual WANs
	a. Includes it is hub and spoke arch
		i. Branch connectivity
		ii. S2S P2S ExpressRoute (private connectivity)
		iii. Intra-cloud
	b. Configure - create
		i.  Virtual WAN
		ii. Hub
		iii. Hub virtual network connection
		iv. H2H connection
		v. Hub route table
	c. WAN are isolated and cant contain a common hub
	d. Basic me S2S vpn only
	e. Standard me sab kuch
	f. Hub - is microsoft managed vnet
		i. Min address space /24
	g. Gateway scale
		i. -----
	h. Connect cross-tenant vnets to a virtual wan hub
	i. Virtual Hub routing
		i. Router - Using BGP
		ii. Virtual hub can contain multiple gateways
		iii. Standard - throughput of 50Gbps.
	j. Hub route table
	k. Create a network virtual appliance (NVA) in a virtual hub
		i. Two resource groups are created
			1) Customer and Managed RG
		ii. Cant access NVA directly
			1) any additional configuration must be performed via the NVA partners portal or management application
		iii. No need to create site to site resource as managed by NVA partner
	l. NVA infrastructure units
		i. One NVA - represent 500Mbps aggregate 1-80
11. ExpressRoute
	a. ExpressRoute lets you extend your on-premises networks into the Microsoft cloud over a private connection with the help of a connectivity provider.
	b. any-to-any (IP VPN) network, a point-to-point Ethernet network, or a virtual cross-connection
	c. Layer 3 connectivity
	d. all regions in the geopolitical region
	e. Global connectivity to Microsoft services across all regions with the ExpressRoute premium add-on
	f. bandwidths up to 100 Gbps
	g. Connectivity models
		i. CloudExchange Co-location 2/3 Layer
		ii. Point-to-point Ethernet Connection 2/3 Layer
		iii. Any-to-any (IPVPN) Connection 3 layer
		iv. ExpressRoute Direct 100/10 Gbps Active/Active connectivity
	h. Design considerations for ExpressRoute deployments
		i. ExpressRoute Direct
			1) Massive data ingestion
			2) Physical isolation - banking government and retail
			3) Granular control of circuit distribution
	i. Route advertisement
		i. BGP sessions with router , no routes advertised to your network
		ii. To enable route advertisement , associate a route filter
			1) Need ExpressRoute circuit
			2) Microsoft peering
	j. Bidirectional Forwarding Detection
		i. MSEE devices - BGP keep-alive and hold time 60 180 sec resp.
		ii. Link failure -> three min to detect and switch to alternate traffic
		iii. Lowest value 3 and 10 sec
		iv. Aggressive not recommended because the BGP protocol is process intensive
		v. BFD provides low-overhead link failure detection in a sub second time interval
		vi. BFD
			1) BFD is configured by default - newly ER private peering interfaces on the MSEEs
			2) Configure on both primary and secondary devices
			3) Two step - configure the BFD on the interface and then link it to the BGP session
	k. Configure encryption over ExpressRoute
		i. Virtual WAN - Ipsec/IKE VPN connection
		ii. Two path normal and Ipsec protected
		iii. For protected make sure ipsec path is preferred over direct ER path
			1) More specific prefixes for VPN bgp
			2) Disjoint
			3) If same azure prefers ER
	l. Redundancy for an expressroute deploymenbt
		i. Configure ExpressRoute and site to site coexisting connections
			1) The ASN of Azure VPN Gateway must be set to 65515
			2) The gateway subnet must be /27 or a shorter prefix
			3) No dual stack IPv6 support
		ii. Create a zone redundant VNET gateway in Azure Availability zones
			1) Zone-redundant and zonal gateways
	m. Configure a Site-to-Site VPN as a failover path for ExpressRoute
		i. This connection applies only to virtual networks linked to the Azure private peering path.
12. Design an ER deployment
	a. SKU
		i. Local - unlimited data plan
		ii. Standard
		iii. Premium
	b. Ingress not charged except when using the Global reach add-on
	c. ER location - peering locations - Microsoft Enterprise Edge (MSEE) devices are located
	d. ER Direct - ME node
	e. ER - service key
	f. Two peering options for ER
		i. Azure Private and Microsoft
	g. L2 me khudko  l3 managed
	h. Private peering  connected to core network
		i. Microsoft peering links are connected to you DMZ
	i. A route filter is a new resource that lets you select the list of services you plan to consume through Microsoft peering.
	j. It is essentially an allowed list of all the BGP community values. Once a route filter resource gets defined and attached to an ExpressRoute circuit, all prefixes that map to the BGP community values gets advertised to your network.
	k. Route filter - only one rule and type Allow
13. Connect an ExpressRoute circuit to a virtual network
	a.  A virtual network gateway for ExpressRoute uses the GatewayType 'ExpressRoute', not VPN
14.  Connect geographically dispersed networks with ExpressRoute global reach
15. Improve data path performance between networks with ExpressRoute FastPath
	a. When enabled, FastPath sends network traffic directly to virtual machines in the virtual network, bypassing the gateway.
16. LoadBalancing
	a. Azure Load Balancer -layer 4 tcp upd zone-redundant
	b. Traffic Manager - dns based traffic - across global Azure regions - fail as Front door
	c. Azure Application Gateway  - Application Delivery controller (ADC) as service - layer 7
		i.  Use it to optimize web farm productivity by offloading CPU-intensive SSL termination to the gate
	d. Azure Front Door - application delivery network that provides global load balancing and site acceleration service for web applications. It offers Layer 7
	e. HTTP(S) load-balancing services are Layer 7 load balancers that only accept HTTP(S) traffic. They're intended for web applications or other HTTP(S) endpoints. They include features such as SSL offload, web application firewall, path-based load balancing, and session affinity.
	Service	Global/regional	Recommended traffic
	Azure Front Door	Global	HTTP(S)
	Traffic Manager	Global	non-HTTP(S)
	Application Gateway	Regional	HTTP(S)
	Azure Load Balancer	Regional or Global	non-HTTP(S)

17. Az load balancer
	a. Zonal, zone-redundant, non-regional
	b. Basic - vm in availability set or scale not individual , only TCP HTTP
	c. Load Balancer
		i. Backend pool
		ii. Health probes
	d. Rule
		i. Session persistence - None ClientIP ClientIP and protocol
18. Azure traffic manager L7
	a. DNS based
	b. Distrio traffic across ap endpoints
	c. Its more of resolution and client connects to endpoints directly not through traffic manager
	d. The duration of the cache is determined by the 'time-to-live' (TTL) property of each DNS record
	e. Azure Traffic Manager supports six traffic-routing methods to determine how to route network traffic to the various service endpoints
		i. Priority
		ii. Weighted
		iii. Performance
		iv. Geographic
		v. Multivalue - IPv4/IPv6 addresses as endpoints. When a query is received for this profile, all healthy endpoints are returned.
		vi. Subnet
	f. Endpoints
		i. Azure endpoints
		ii. External endpoints
		iii. Nested endpoints
	g. eight header:value pairs separated by a comma
	h. by default the value 200 is defined as the success status code
19. Azure application gateway
	a. web traffic load balancer
	b. Routing based on URI path or host headers
	c. /images ...
	d. WAF
	e. Routing
		i. Path based
		ii. Multiple site - separate listeners
	f. SKU
		i. Azure gateway v2 and WAF v2 skus
		ii. 0 to 125 instance in autoscaling
20. Configure Azure App gateway
	○ Redirection
		§ Global redirection
		§ Path-based redirection
		§ Redirect to external site
	○ For basic rule only one setting - for a path based multiple back-end HTTP setting
	a. rewrite types
		i. Request and response headers
		ii. URL path and query string
		iii. Rewrite actions
21. Azure Front Door
	a. Enables an entry point to your apps positioned in the Microsoft global edge network. Provides faster, more secure, and scalable access to your web applications.
	b. Like  CDN
	c. Standard and premium
	d. Routing rule configuration
		i. Left hand side - front door matches the incoming request to the left-hand side
		ii. Right hand side - defines how Front Door processes the request
		iii. Azure Front Door redirects traffic at each of the following levels: protocol, hostname, path, query string
	e. Destination fragment and query string
	f. Probes http/https on TCP port configured cannot be overridden
	g. Default probe method HEAD
	h. Only 200 OK considered healthy
	i. Secure Front Door with SSL
		i. Azure manages certification
22. Get network security recommendations with Microsoft Defender for Cloud
	a. NS
		i. NS-1: Establish network segmentation boundaries
			1) ASGs enable you to configure network security as a natural extension of an application's structure, allowing you to group virtual machines and define network security policies based on those groups
		ii. NS-2: Secure cloud services with network controls
			1) Private access point  for the resources, disable restrict access from public
		iii. NS-3: Deploy firewall at the edge of enterprise network
			1) At a minimum, block known bad IP addresses and high-risk protocols, such as remote management (for example, RDP and SSH) and intranet protocols (for example, SMB and Kerberos).
		iv. NS-4: Deploy intrusion detection/intrusion prevention systems (IDS/IPS)
			1) Microsoft Defender for Endpoint, at the VM
		v. NS-5: Deploy DDOS protection
		vi. NS-6: Deploy web application firewall
			1) WAF - modes - detection / prevention
		vii. NS-7: Simplify network security configuration
			1) Microsoft Defender for Cloud Adaptive Network Hardening to recommend NSG hardening rules => based on threat intelligence and traffic analysis result.
			2) Azure Firewall Manager to centralize the firewall policy and route management of the virtual network.
		viii. NS-8: Detect and disable insecure services and protocols
			1)  Azure Sentinel’s built-in Insecure Protocol Workbook to discover the use of insecure services
		ix. NS-9: Connect on-premises or cloud network privately
		x. NS-10: Ensure Domain Name System (DNS) security
	b. Microsoft cloud security benchmark
		i. Two aspects - Security controls and service baselines
		ii. Control
			1) A control is a high-level description of a feature or activity that needs to be addressed and is not specific to a technology or implementation.
			2) Data Protection is one of the security control families. Data Protection contains specific actions that must be addressed to help ensure data is protected
		iii. Baseline
			1) A baseline is the implementation of the control on the individual Azure services (only for Azure available)
	c. Using Microsoft Defender for Cloud for regulatory compliance
		i. Regulatory Compliance Dashboard
		ii. Alerts
23. Azure DDoS Protection by using the Azure portal
	a. Service tiers
		i. Network protection  doesn't apply to App Service Environments
		ii. IP protection
	b. Types of DDoS attack s
		i. Volumetric attacks
		ii. Protocol attack
		iii. Resource (application) layer attacks
	c. Features
		i. Always-on traffic monitoring
		ii. Adaptive real-time tuning
			1) The service accomplishes this by using two insights:
				a) Automatic learning of per-customer (per- Public IP) traffic patterns for Layer 3 and 4.
				b) Minimizing false positives, considering that the scale of Azure allows it to absorb a significant amount of traffic.
		iii. Attack metrics, alerts, and logs
			1) DDoS Protection applies three autotuned mitigation policies (SYN, TCP, and UDP) for each public IP in vnet where DDoS protection is enabled
24. NSG
	a. Priority => 100 and 4096
	b. 5 tuple information - source, source port, destination, destination port and protocol
	c. 3i3o default
	d. An Application Security Group (ASG) enables you to configure network security as a natural extension of an application's structure, allowing you to group virtual machines and define network security policies based on those groups
25. Azure Firewall
	a. Fully stateful
	b. Multiple public IP 250
	c. SNAT DNAT
	d. Rule collection type
		i. DNAT Network Application
		ii.  define multiple Rule Collection types within a single Rule Collection Group
	e. DNAT -> network -> application
	f. All rules are terminating - if rule is matched no rules are processed therafter
	g. Outbound rules
		i. If there is no network rule match, and if the protocol is either HTTP, HTTPS, or MSSQL, then the packet is then evaluated by the application rules in priority order. For HTTP, Azure Firewall looks for an application rule match according to the Host Header, whereas for HTTPS, Azure Firewall looks for an application rule match according to Server Name Indication (SNI) only.
	h. Application rules aren't applied for inbound connections.
	i. When creating firewall rules, it is best to use the FQDN tags
	j. Priority settings can be any number between 100 and 65000. With 100 being the highest priority.
26. Azure Firewall Manager
	Azure Firewall Manager is a security management service that provides central security policy and route management for cloud-based security perimeters.
27. Implement a WAF on Azure Front Door
	a. By default in detection mode
	b. Two types of rule - match rule and rate limit rule
28. virtual network service endpoints
	a. virtual network service endpoints to extend your private address space in Azure
	b. Adding service endpoints doesn't remove the public endpoint. It simply provides a redirection of traffic.
	c. Preparing to Implement Service Endpoints
		Turn off public access to the service.
		Add the Service Endpoint to a virtual network
		i. Service tags - group of IP
29. Private Link Service and private endpoint
	a. Private Endpoints grant network access to specific resources behind a given service providing granular segmentation
30. When you use DNS Private Resolver, you don't need a DNS forwarder VM
	Incorrect, in a non-virtual network scenario, a private IP address is used instead of 168.63.129.16. This private IP address is dynamically discovered through DHCP. In a virtual network, 168.63.129.16 is a virtual public IP address that is used to facilitate a communication channel to Azure platform resources.
31. Restrict network access to PaaS resources with virtual network service endpoints using the Azure portal
32. Azure monitor and azure network watcher
	a. Azure monitor
		i. data - metrics and logs
		ii. Metrics - time series database
			Virtual machine agents - Metrics are collected from the guest operating system of a virtual machine. Enable guest OS metrics for Windows virtual machines with Windows Diagnostic Extension (WAD) and for Linux virtual machines with InfluxData Telegraf Agent
	b. Metrics Explorer
	c. Monitor network resources with Azure Monitor Network Insights
		network monitoring features such as Connection Monitor, flow logging for network security groups (NSG) flow logs, and Traffic Analytics, and it provides other network diagnostic features.

		Network health and metrics
		Connectivity
		Traffic
		Diagnostic Toolkit
			Network Watcher packet capture
			vpn troubleshoot
			Network Watcher IP flow
		The Traffic tab of Azure Monitor Network Insights provides access to all NSGs configured for NSG flow logs and Traffic Analytics for the selected set of subscriptions, grouped by location.
33. Azure Network Watcher
	a. regional service
	b. at scenario level
	c. IaaS products
	d. IP flow - security rules
	e. Tools/features
		i. Network topology
		ii. Verify IP flow
		iii. Next Hop
		iv. Effective security rules
		v. VPN diagnostics
		vi. Packet capture
		vii. Connection troubleshoot
		viii. NSG flow logs
	f. Connection Monitor
	g. Traffic Analytics

```

Traffic Analytics analyzes Network Watcher network security group (NSG) flow logs to provide insights into traffic flow